hey everyone meet again Lazlo Montgomery
part 4 and our little overview series
covering the life of john s service
through the life of john service we're
also looking at some of the history of
us-china relations during the time after
the capital of nationalist China the
Republic of China he had been moved from
Nanjing to Chongqing as I've mentioned
before him using Lin joiners honorable
survivor Mao's China mccarthy's America
and the persecution of john s service we
have traced his life up to this point
from his beginnings growing up in
sichuan province attending school and
shanghai in the 1920s and then moving
back to the US then through his lifelong
friend john patton davies he joins the
Foreign Service and he arrives in China
pretty much just in time for World War
two and it's here where we have been
lingering of recent we are focusing of
course here at the royal china history
podcast on the life of john service
during this period in wartime china 1941
in 1945 there are major roles and
walk-on parts played by people whose
names populate a thousand history books
about the time we left off last time
recovering from the aftershocks of
patrick Hurley's outrage after he found
out Colonel David Barrett had been
wandering around up again on with a
bunch of OSS spooks secretly
collaborating with the Communists Mao
and John are both enjoying themselves
toying with Hurley who they have figured
out doesn't know anything early can't
figure out what the heck is going on as
far as why ma won't come to the table
but after he finds out it's because
miles already sitting at the table in a
manner of speaking Hurley goes ballistic
and like I said last time in episode 117
heads rolled and blood flowed so first
still well get scanned and now there's
all this terrible blowback from this
incident service is not in China when
all this is going down in late December
1944 morale amongst the China hands and
those who were like-minded was
at an all-time low the Ichigo offensive
might have put some heat on Allied air
bases in China but now Japan was being
hammered from the east by u.s. bombers
everyone knows Japan's going down it's
just a matter of when with all this bad
karma pervading the US Embassy in
Chongqing John service returns in
January 1945 now things are going to get
very ugly and very personal January
ninth Joanne ly kicks things off by
attempting to send a secret message to
FDR to hold a tete-a-tete with Mao and
himself who knows what might have
happened if this message had found its
mark FDR never knew about it and so this
one got filed under lost historical
opportunities of course this effort on
Joe's part was kept secret from
ambassador Hurley there's a lot of
chatter and dialogue going back and
forth between the military the embassy
journalists various spy agencies KMT CCP
and everybody is eavesdropping on
everyone messages are being intercepted
letters being opened of course the
censorship in Chongqing was legendary
Sacco remember them sino-american
co-operative organization is sort of a
joint venture between the OSS and
China's oft referred to Himmler Dai Li
so we know whose side they rooted for
they intercepted plenty of stuff and
ranted young with it and and everyone
was having a field day feeding
ambassador Hurley all those bogus
information to manipulate his ego and
sway him in the right direction at this
point there's no use talking to Patrick
Hurley about telling him what a nice guy
mile was the US ambassador was so
tightly inside the pocket of the songs
of Jung and all those considered part of
the China lobby and then suddenly to
stir up the pot and kick up some dust
Hurley ran and told FDR that all these
military OSS and State Department people
are all secretly undermining him and
preventing him from carrying out FDR's
objectives
FDR predictably gets all bent out of
shape so then he yells a general wet a
Meyer you know who then yells at hurley
for you know running and telling the
boss about this the atmosphere is really
poisonous incheon chain when services
flight lands he flew in with Wild Bill
Donovan who he met up with a new delhi
he hadn't even unpacked his bags yet
when Hurley calls him in and warns them
you know no doubt with a wagging finger
that you know if he tries any of his
famous antics he'll be a dead man
walking he doesn't use those words but
thanks to sufficient cajoling by the
secret police Hurley had been by now led
to believe that of all these forces
working against him service was the
worst of the worst now technically
service is still working for what a
Meyer as a political officer remember
general wet a Meyer kept him on after we
replaced still well surely can't dismiss
service but he can make his life
difficult which ony had flown into chung
chang on january 24th 1945 keep the
charade going about trying to work
things out nobody expected these
negotiations to go anywhere so when they
went nowhere no one was surprised Joe
left on februari 16th and flew back
empty-handed te ni so ambassador Hurley
is really tightening the clamps and is
determined to force some kind of
settlement between the CCP and KMT wet a
Meyer doesn't want any further trouble
with Hurley so he is making sure the lid
is tight in the military no one is going
to be able to get anything out there
that conflicted with current USA policy
that still called for sole support of
the Nationalist government and those
guys only but then US policy suddenly
changes when John Carter Vincent at
state sends out a contradictory order
telling everyone we are not married to
the nationalists and should still
consider other options then shortly
after this comes the Yalta Conference
Jang is expecting to be treated like the
great power that he is and instead
china has sold up the river by the big
three the Soviets would end up
controlling Outer Mongolia as well as
getting long-term leases at Port Arthur
for their Navy Dalian was to be
internationalized which is a fancy way
of saying the Russians got to enjoy
their own concession there and the
railroads of Manchuria the lifeblood of
the whole northeast China region were to
be managed with the cooperation of a
Soviets now all of this was kept secret
initially but the cat gets out of the
bag not too soon after so much for the
chiro conference let's go now to the
service Ludden report this is going to
shake things up once it gets out raymond
p Ludden he was another one of the China
hands of this period along with John Pat
and Davies and others I've mentioned and
not mentioned Ludden was part of
Stilwell's gang of political officers
who now like Jack service worked for wet
a Meyer Ludden was also part of the
Dixie mission his role was to travel
around the north of China and validate
all these wild claims previously made by
service regarding the success of the
chai comms up there this is an amazing
story Laden traveled with six fellow
American observers and a Chinese guide
all around the North for over a thousand
miles they trekked through the dead of
north china's harsh winter all the way
to the japanese military headquarters
set up in bout ding in hebei but halfway
between Beijing and sure Jaejoong they
brought back a treasure trove of info
about the real situation up north so
blood in return to yen on from this long
perilous journey that was by the way
just one of the many adventures he had
in his life so he comes back and
basically corroborates everything
service had been writing about in his
report so general what a Meyer who was
scheduled to head back to the US with
Ambassador Hurley for talks requests
Ludden and service to write some sort of
definitive report that gives the whole
situation up there with respect to the
Communists and the popular support that
they were getting the report
when it was completed and handed to wet
a Meyer outlined the entire case against
the Nationalists in the kind of detail
that Jack service was famous for it
explained how the CCP had won over the
hearts and minds of the local populace
in north china he vehemently called for
American military cooperation with the
Communists in the same way that
Churchill had called for support of Tito
in Yugoslavia in the fight against the
Germans the end of me of my enemy is my
friend the two top guys in Chongqing
what am I earn Hurley flew to DC for
talks in February nineteenth nineteen
forty-five this left their deputies in
charge and these two are going to play
with matches and burn the whole dang
house down George Atchison Hurley's
deputy took it upon himself to have this
viewpoint expressed in the service
Ludden report shared you know throughout
the halls of power in Washington and of
course in Chongqing he and everyone else
at the embassy new Hurley had been white
washing all the dispatches and was as
much of a stooge of the KMT has Hurley
claimed that you know jack service was
to the communist etchison along with
what a meijer number two brigadier
general Mervyn gross arranged to send a
message to DC to broaden the discussion
and get the word out about the real
situation on the ground in China they
were hoping to force some discussion on
the matter rather than do nothing and
risk the likelihood that Hurley would
monopolize the narrative not to mention
the whole agenda one didn't have to read
too far into the first page to realize
this report smelled of John services
handiwork even though he wasn't
officially part of state they still
depended on his skills to make the point
but then like Cain mutant heirs who had
finally had enough everyone at the
embassy personally signed off on the
content it was concluded quote this
telegram has been drafted with the
assistance and agreement of all the
political officers of the staff of this
embassy and has been shown to general
wetta Myers chief of staff general gross
februari 28th 1945 they let this baby
fly how do you think Hurley is going to
react to this everyone knew what they
were doing sending such an openly
contrary viewpoint blindsiding the boss
forcing him in a corner but again no
speed of communication like we have
nowadays they could blast that report
out Hurley didn't see it immediately it
first slowly permeated into the halls of
the Department of State and then into
the press of course meanwhile the Dixie
mission is still not officially over and
in March a big thing is starting to get
organized and yeah not a party congress
this is going to be the seventh that she
died it's going to be held end of april
to mid june and yen on of course 544
delegates are going to represent what is
now in early nineteen forty-five a CCP
that is 1.2 million members strong it's
a pretty big deal and a draft party
constitution is going to be passed and
my thought is for the first time going
to be enshrined in this party document
this is the last party congress until
after liberation on october first 1949
so it's a pretty big thing and john
service gets the okay from george
Atchison Doug go observe the party
congress and report back any useful
Intel so March knife John service flies
back to yen on and has given strict
instructions don't get sucked into
politics and he's told to keep his mouth
shut and don't do anything that
contravenes ambassador Hurley's orders
with all this confusion recently in
policy atchison figured sending service
up there would do more good than harm so
off to yen on he went the welcome
service got this time compared to when
he first landed in yen on last July 1944
was a lot different pretty much from now
on down everyone had just had it with
American duplicity and broken promises
Mao knew all along that there was no way
to
separate the Americans from the
Nationalists but it must have been a
bitter pill to swallow when the
realization finally came the Dixie
mission would continue mixing with the
CCP until july 22nd 1947 but the whole
flavor of the mission had gone sour and
besides the OSS was mostly running
things up there and everyone knows they
weren't the best diplomats to have JX
service got an earful when he went up
there predictably they rag Don him again
about Patrick Hurley going back on his
word on that five-point plan they beat
that dead horse a few more times and
they pretty much let service know they
felt Hurley was more or less junk I
shacks chief spokesman in there didn't
seem to be any way to reconcile this
situation John service got plenty of
face time with Mao on this trip and with
many of the other leaders to he
dutifully recorded down all his
observations no doubt anxious to bring
all this info back to headquarters at
all came straight from the horse's mouth
meanwhile back in DC John Carter Vincent
is the lucky one who gets to hand a copy
of at jasons report to Hurley the one
that all chongqing embassy staff signed
off on to show solidarity against the
ambassador well Hurley saw red he called
this tantamount to treason and
immediately started looking to get even
and could all Hurley he took one look at
this report from the embassy and he knew
right away who the black hand was who
produced this immediately he seeks
retribution and files protests against
the entire staff Hurley made all kinds
of protests but too many people were
wise now the notion to consider other
options besides John kai-shek was not so
easily quashed FDR continued to do
things his way secretly without the
knowledge of cabinet officials
continuing to use emissaries this was
one of the reasons for a lot of this
mistrust people no matter which side
they were on were just too tied to their
own core beliefs on this one and whoever
sported Jung supported John but no one
was going to change their mind and those
who
what Jack serve is new well they might
not all agree that mile was the answer
but they couldn't be swayed in their
belief that the kmt definitely wasn't
the answer either March 22nd the
you-know-what hits the fan in a big way
when word got out in DC that John
service was up in yen on again inquiries
were made at once and it soon learned
that Atchison and army headquarters had
both okayed this and in fact insisted to
send service as the most logical choice
you know to go check out what was going
on at this upcoming party congress well
Hurley was livid to say the least first
this high-profile betrayal of his whole
staff and chong chang signing off on
that report like they did and now this
eternal stone in his boot this burr and
his saddle john s service was up in yen
on no doubt whooping it up with mao
zedong who hurley by the way referred to
as moose dung now it had all gone too
far filled with all the self-importance
from the Otori toss FDR conferred on him
hurley started throwing fireballs and
before you know it hurley did service
what he did the still well he started
making a ruckus and calling in all his
favors and made his grand case against
all those traitors who have been
secretly undermining him all along eight
days later service is told to get
himself back to chong ching he left yen
on on April fourth 1945 he had spent
quite a bit of time with mall Joe and
all the leaders discussing the American
and Chinese positions but when John
service got on that plane and left yen
on the next time anyone would be talking
turkey with mall and joe would be more
than a quarter century later when henry
kissinger snuck out of Pakistan to meet
with joe and lie in Beijing in 1971 that
was it when Jack services playing took
off there were no more serious
discussions it was effectively over
service was being chased out of there by
his government and told not to talk to
those guys anymore once service arrived
in Chongqing he was told he was being
sent back to the
dates for reassignment somewhere in the
State Department as far as China went
and this war and all these negotiations
and diplomacy with the KMT and ccp those
days were over for him so we left China
Jack service didn't go back for a very
long time about 30 years he thought he
was going back to Washington where he
would be warmly welcomed you know to
talk some sense to all those who hadn't
yet seen the light no one briefed him
yet on how noxious the fumes were in
Washington with respect to the whole
matter of China policy John is service
when he returned to the u.s. in april of
nineteen forty-five thought he was just
going in for the usual consultations and
he was anxious to tell what he he alone
knew after all these private meetings
with mall and the other leaders instead
he's going to be run through the wringer
it was career ruined his reputation
everything Patrick Hurley and all those
who supported the powerful China lobby
in the u.s. we're gonna put John service
through an unimaginable amount of
personal and professional pain he was in
Patrick Hurley's gunsights now early had
gotten rid of Stillwell it caused john
patton davies to be transferred out of
china he had ruined Colonel David
Barrett's promotion and had him
transferred out of China as well and his
staff and chong chang who gravely signed
their name to the report sent to
Washington based on the service Ludden
findings they all got whacked to for
daring to challenge their bosses point
of view now another one who hurley
didn't see eye to eye with was going to
get beheaded by the ambassador when
Hurley was on his way back to China he
ran into Wild Bill Donovan and was told
by the OSS head that John Carter Vinson
was suspected of passing on sensitive
documents to a journalist who shared
them with spies from the Soviet Union ha
gotcha John Carter Vincent being high up
and all in the State Department had
always been sort of untouchable to
Hurley now with Donovan's tip-off he'd
get him later so Hurley flew back to
China via London and Moscow he was
filling the Allied leaders
in on the latest and chong ching and
that he was going to go down and sit
with the ccp and kmt and bring these
guys together once and for all despite
everything learned to the contrary
hurley still believed he could do it so
JX service arrives in Washington just in
time for FDR to feel that sharp pain in
the back of his head that signaled his
death on April twelfth nineteen
forty-five miles of dome sent his
condolences through general weda Meyer's
office ok so Roosevelt dies Stalin does
this little thing that he does and goes
smashes and grabs what he wants he knows
no one could stop them and saw the US
was a bit shell-shocked after losing FDR
and worst of all perhaps was at this
great and charismatic leader who so
shaped the destiny of 20th century
America was suddenly gone and in his
place was an untested former haberdasher
turned politician from a Midwestern
state that most pronounced Missouri but
the new president pronounced Missouri
like professor Bob Truman by the way was
so new on the job and although he was
the vice president in the short time
that he had been serving just a few
months only FDR had never had a sit-down
with him to discuss the war the p's
foreign policy Russia China Truman just
walked in cold so every one of my
ancient demographic who remembers the
cold warriors can see it all starting to
happen just about now there's not much
the US can do in 1945 to push back on
Stalin so right away not that that was
all whole heck of a lot of trust to
begin with the US and Soviets are
already circling their wagons and it'll
be like this of course for the next 30
years or so so service hits town just as
Roosevelt dies and the first one he sees
our vincent and lachlan curry service
spills his guts about everything he saw
and heard up and yen on no need to
rehash what the main points where he was
trying to convey he insisted now was the
crucial moment the u.s. either found
some way to fit the CCP into its foreign
policy or we just watch this one walk
out the door and
face the consequences so Hurley you know
rode off into the sunset back to China
to save the day and bring the CCP and
KMT together and a happy cozy coalition
government ally to the USA of course at
the same time service is running around
DC like chicken littles spreading this
message about the sky falling unless we
face up to the reality is going on right
at the moment in China both Vincent and
curry hooked service up with all kinds
of reporters and government people
hoping that having someone with
first-hand knowledge of the situation up
in China might have more street cred and
here is where I'm going to sort of well
not really end our saga of it's sort of
pick up the pace and zoom out to give
you the big picture but half of Lin
joiners book on John's service deals
with his life in China we've now covered
all that the second part concerns what
happens to service after he fell into
the sausage grinding machine that
combined Washington politics and the Red
Scare that was soon going to start to
ramp up so I will encourage you all once
again if you want to read some
fascinating stuff on those crazy
paranoid Cold War days in the 1950s Lynn
Joyner delivers it up it's a very
confusing and complicated tale filled
with all kinds of journalists and
lawyers FBI types you know including J
Edgar Hoover spooks from the OSS oh ni
and the KGB Pro jung-an tight young
people Washington people spies and more
turncoats than you could shake a stick
at and then into all this came Joe
McCarthy to sort it all out and half a
century after it happened we're still
discussing and analyzing the rubble of
what the McCarthy hearings left behind
so John's service got dragged by his
ankles through all of what went down in
Washington in the late 40s and into the
early 50s back in those bad old days the
FBI sort of didn't pay as much attention
to the Fourth Amendment to the
Constitution as they do today so
everyone in their mother who was suspect
were being illegally surveilled
by the FBI they had bugs everywhere they
had agents checking out Jack service
constantly those phone calls as private
conversations and restaurants as male
what he kept in his drawers and his desk
and and of course you know who he met
with and that was the problem that's
what sunk Jack service a week after he
hits town he meets with a guy named
Philip Jaffe Jaffe was one of the
founders of a left-leaning magazine
called amer Asia but your people are
going to go down in flames for their
association with Jaffe amer Asia
magazine pushed the Communist agenda and
we're sympathetic to the cause worldwide
communism so naturally this put them on
the radar and Jaffe being a known
communist to the FBI was always kept
under close surveillance when Jack
service met with Philip Jaffe he didn't
know that he was really putting himself
in harm's way service and a lot of
others too were how shall we say a
little bit too trusting with the
sensitive information they had in their
possession that's the crux of the whole
mess that followed Lynn Joyner goes into
plenty of detail in her book how all
this went down poor john service walked
into more traps than anyone I have ever
heard of he really was his own worst
enemy hey baby loose lips sink ships so
the US government puts all the resources
of the Justice Department and go after
Amerasian for all these articles they
have been publishing based on materials
that were highly classified so the FBI
took him down Jack service to hey his
reports were found inside a mirages
offices out of those guys get it all
sorts in the government and military
were leaking info to amer Asia and in
the political climate at the time this
couldn't go on for too long without
something happening at the same time
that Jack service was getting ready to
be taken down general wet a Meyer sent a
letter of commendation the Secretary of
State who you know stayed on after
Truman took over he gave service quite
an endorsement so he still had a lot of
support from many lofty characters in
the government and mill
Terry but on june sixth nineteen
forty-five that was the end for john s
Service the FBI arrested him along with
Philip Jaffe and four others as far as
services role in what became known as
the amur Asia affair what they found was
a lot of negligence on his part and
handing out a lot of documents that were
still classified at worst he was stupid
and trusting of these guys like Jaffe
but he did what he did and the Justice
Department was going to show these
commies sympathizers what happens when
you root for the wrong team well too bad
for the FBI the grand jury decided not
to indict service maybe he was careless
and shouldn't have been so free with his
many reports from the front lines in
China he passed this stuff out to people
he shouldn't have and got caught but he
wasn't passing the stuff to any foreign
governments or anything that serious
Jaffe and two others ended up with
indictments but you know like it happens
sometimes the case was bungled due to
certain legal complications related to
the FBI getting caught scraping the
Fourth Amendment off the bottom of a
shoe so the three defendants and the
amur Asia affair got off easy although
of course you know everyone knew from
that point on to stay away from them but
the amur Asia affair was going to have a
big impact on john services life what
this affair did was raise a red flag
about the seriousness of communist
infiltration in this country and that it
even permeated the halls of State
Department and this directly led to you
know the whole Joe McCarthy thing that
is almost universally looked back on as
one of the darkest moments in modern
American history so Lynn joiners
narrative about how all these communists
and communist sympathizers and dupes
like Jack service wall became entangled
in this web of intrigue and revenge is
it's just beautiful even in 2013 post
9-11 you know with the Patriot Act and
everything reading all this and taking
in the brazenness of the FBI and the
intelligence services
really an eye-opener people were tracked
down and destroyed back then in the
1940s just as they are today the only
difference I can see is all that fancy
technologies we have today and services
main tormentor Patrick early now that he
had service where he wanted them he
piled on two in all his reports and
communications he never missed a chance
to spread most of the blame for his
failures on the counter measures taken
by service so he really did his best to
blame all these China hands but he
seemed to reserve his greatest vitriol
for john s service and if you read some
of the statements made by service and
private correspondence the feelings were
pretty much mutual but the pendulum
always swings both ways and Hurley's 15
minutes were just about up by now
everyone was wise to him and his
benefactor FDR was already gone with the
ages and after all this time saying I'm
going to bring Jung and mile together
you know they were finally demanding to
know where was that beef by may of
nineteen forty-five Hurley was under
fire mostly due to his own big mouth and
tendency to over promise what he had
done to the popular general Stilwell
didn't win him a lot of admiration in
the military when he fired every staff
member who signed that embassy memo that
was based on the info learned from the
service Ludden report trust me plenty of
people in the foggy bottom community
were grumbling Patrick Hurley wasn't so
invincible anymore so service drops head
first into the maw of the prosecutorial
gears of the Justice Department no less
a personage than J Edgar Hoover himself
was watching this case with daily
interest but service had friends in high
places and Tommy Corcoran yes Tommy to
Cork we mentioned him in part one he's
back and he gets a little ham fisted in
the manner he pulls all the strings but
he gets service off the hook and August
that same year right around the time of
the atomic bombings of Japan how Tommy
the cork pulled all those
strings again fascinating reading about
1940s DC politics and lobbying I'm not
going to say too much more about China
and what happened after Jack service
left yen on in April by August no one
needed an abundance of brain cells to
know Civil War was not only coming it
was already underway this is going to be
what we look at next here at the royal
china history podcast so everything
going on in China from Japan's surrender
to liberation sort of like a romance of
the two kingdoms that whole epoch is
coming next after service was cleared in
the Amur Asia case he went back to work
at the State Department now the true era
began of the Red Scare 1948 it started
to ramp up and after Mao emerged
victorious in late nineteen forty nine
and after he said he would lean towards
Stalin's direction that's when it all
exploded like a supernova the stage was
set for the house on American Activities
Committee this excellent piece of
political theatre inspiration for so
many great Hollywood movies began in
august of 1948 a man everything John
service and all his ilk had been saying
for so long finally happened and there
had to be some scapegoats hung out to
blame for this you see the big deal back
then after the PRC was established and
during the lead up to the Korean War the
chorus in Washington was quite shrill in
demanding to find out who was to blame
for losing China we lost China but if we
meaning the USA lost China then that
would sort of mean it was ours to begin
with what did we have what did we lose
the American public well they were just
chowing down on the Red Scare you know
propaganda this was you know going to be
a whole new industry red dawn wasn't
built in a day service helped write a
white paper that was supposed to be the
final word on what happened in China
came out in August 1949 rather than
serve as something constructive the
whole thing exploded in the face of the
Truman
illustration the china lobby in the US
was not to be taken lightly and they
fought back hard against any anti kmt
literate or the soft spot had always
been the amur asia magazine case and how
service got off scot-free and the other
ones involved in the scandal shady
characters all got off of a slap on the
wrist so the magnificent and always
reliable Washington political dredging
industry pull this one up off the bottom
of the Potomac and by changing the
narrative once again service was back in
the spotlight once the Taiwan problem
officially came into being following the
founding of the PRC it added a whole and
totally unexpected dynamic to the state
of affairs between the US and China Wow
what do you do now gee who saw that one
coming january nineteen fifty truman
tells all Yanks get out of china young
and the entire china lobby were pulling
out all the stops to make sure we stuck
with the kmt even though they were sort
of you know in this temporary political
predicament that's still going on by the
way it didn't take long before the
Americans 7th fleet was sailing back and
forth along the Taiwan Strait februari 9
1950 Joe McCarthy gave his famous speech
in West Virginia with a list of 205
names and were often running Hoover and
the karthi join forces and I bet you
could guess with the first guy they
fingered yes our hero John s service he
was the first of the known communist
agents operating inside the State
Department so service was serving in
Calcutta at that moment was about to get
put through the wringer again he's now
front-page news and he's getting a ton
of shine on him his friends and allies
all embrace him but the year nineteen
fifty is a dark one for anyone
considered a China hand by the end of
May service was going through these
loyalty herrings at the State
Department's new loyalty security board
the charge against service went like
this you are remember or in sympathetic
association with the Communist Party
which has been designated by the
Attorney General as an organization
which seeks to alter the form of
government of the United States by
unconstitutional means and further that
you are a person who has habitual or
close associations with persons known or
believed to be in that category to an
extent which would justify the
conclusion that you might through such
an association voluntarily or
involuntarily divulge classified
information without authority well I
suppose you could say that but is that a
good thing or a bad thing did it hurt
the government and services case or
didn't it anyway July twentieth nineteen
fifty services name is cleared and
mccarthy gets a kick in the teeth but
wait mccarthy makes a comeback in the
midterms and before the champagne is
finished service is once again hauled in
front of the loyalty hearings with a all
new kinds of evidence dredged up a
testing to his unswerving support of the
chai cons by november first of that year
chinese and american soldiers were
killing each other on the frozen korean
peninsula you can't imagine what this
was doing to the whole firestorm of
communist hysteria that was raging
across the u.s. how much worse could
this get for Jack service it got pretty
bad this number 13 1951 the verdict was
given in his loyalty hearing it was
determined that quote based on the
intentional and unauthorized disclosure
of documents and information of a
confidential and non-public character
unquote there was a reasonable doubt in
the case of services loyalty so he got
kicked out of the State Department by
1952 John service was selling steam
traps in Mexico for nine thousand
dollars a year for a company named Sarco
international the McCarthy witch hunts
were in full swing October thirty-first
of that year services lawyer filed a
lawsuit against the government to clear
his name in five years later on jun 17
1957 this US Supreme Court in a
unanimous vote did just that the
following month the state
Martin was ordered to hire Jack serve
his back but it wasn't what you'd call
much of a career by then after all that
he had been a part of from 1941 in 1945
to have it all come down to this was
just too much for John service he
retired from the Foreign Service in may
of nineteen sixty-two he was not quite
53 years old what did he do service
ended up being a lecturer and permanent
fixture at UC Berkeley and he was in
Berkeley when news of kissinger secret
visit to China came in 1971 and China
mania began suddenly Jack service was
back in the public spotlight but this
time in a good way and the whole
wretched story of his persecution was
told but this time in the context of
Nixon's impending visit to China so a
bad thing I was suddenly a good thing
and on September 1971 john s service on
the invitation of premier Chou Enlai
landed in Beijing with his wife Carolyn
despite the Lin Bo incident that had
just happened it was a time of happy
reunions and he traveled around a
shanghai and to yen on into his
birthplace in chengdu there and Chengdu
he saw his boyhood home and the ymca's
father had established both still there
hello wasn't why anymore he happened to
be in China when Kissinger was there
working out the details of Nixon's
upcoming visit in February 72 Kissinger
eagerly sought out John service and was
the beneficiary of a little inside info
about how these Chinese leaders looked
at things especially the matter of
Taiwan Kissinger was quite thankful for
the advice and later invited service to
visit Nixon in him at the Western White
House in San Clemente about 90 minutes
away from where I now sit before service
left China for the u.s. he had a long
sit down with premier Joe and they
talked of old times of course and the
dramas they shared in chong chang and
yen on it was different now to talk
about those days from a 1970s
perspective then back in nineteen forty
four Jack service went back to America
and
71 with China mania really ramping up
ping-pong diplomacy had already happened
he got some more shine on him and was
eagerly sought out for TV shows and
magazines stories after all he knew
Chairman Mao and Joe and lie so for the
remaining years of his life Jack service
got to trade on his good name that had
been fully restored nobody listened to
him back and chong chang in 1943 1944
what is there to say except this is just
another one of those what ifs that will
never know the answer to more than two
decades of friendship lost between the
US and China and all the good that might
have come out of that the Korean War the
Vietnam War the Red Scare McCarthy the
Cold War not to mention Mao successes
everything might have turned out
differently if the US had embraced the
PRC and 49 rather than nineteen seventy
nine who knows if things might have been
better better for who who knows didn't
turn out that way service went back to
China a few more times one of those
times to trace the footsteps of the Long
March with Harrison salsbury who
produced a best-selling book about the
journey and his 1985 work the Long March
the untold story John service passed
away quietly on februari third 1999 at
the ripe old age of 89 he lived out his
remaining years associated with UC
Berkeley where my daughter attends now
his obituary in The New York Times went
like this quote John s service the first
of the old China hands purged from the
State Department in the McCarthy era
died yesterday in Oakland California he
was 89 as a young foreign officer in
world war two he filed prescient reports
on the rival forces battling the
occupying Japanese John kai-shek's
nationalists and mao zedong's communists
and observed the corruption and weakness
of the former but after the war as what
became known as the china lobby swung
american policy
wrongly behind the failing John
government the Communists gained full
control of the mainland in 1949 driving
the Nationalists to Taiwan much of the
blame fell on what was said at the time
to be a pro-soviet conspiracy in the
State Department who lost china became a
major election slogan that shaped
American political life for many years
it helped make the careers of Joseph R
McCarthy and Richard M Nixon and
according to some historians helped
shaped American involvement in the
Korean and Vietnam wars unquote he got
all the respect that he deserved he had
his detractors and of course he was
never able to fully shake off the taint
of the amur Asia affair but as the years
go by the lens of history becomes more
and more focused and Jon Stewart service
though maligned and his own day it was
truly one of the greatest China hands of
the 20th century and maybe sort of a
patron saint to all American China hands
who are out there in the trenches today
playing their collective small parts and
building strong us-china relations I'm
sure you are wondering whatever happened
to Patrick Hurley he sent in his
resignation to President Truman on
November 26 1945 he clung to the belief
that he had been wronged and blamed all
those who worked against him I was going
to read excerpts of his resignation
letter because it's really a doozy but
we're well into stoppage time again and
I have to tie up all these loose ends
yet he remained a Republican stalwart
for the rest of his days and he ran for
the Senate three times from his home
state of New Mexico but lost each time
he got into the uranium mining business
in the 1950s and died on July thirtieth
1963 at the age of 80 so that's it we
did it in four parts John service ladies
and gentlemen I did not include any of
the details of John services family life
is marriage or his you know personal
life go read the book he was an
interesting
guy and I hope in these past four
episodes you have an idea who he was and
of the times he lived in thanks for
hanging in there if you made it this far
hope you enjoyed this story next time
when we convene I am going to start a
series on the Chinese Civil War 1945
1949 I'll pick up right about the time
when John service left yen on for the
last time and things really began to fly
off the rails this topic of course has
always been on the list since day one
but Barry and Beijing gave me the idea
to do this one and hey perfect timing
too I got a big invasion from ningbo
coming next week not going to have much
time for the China history podcast I'm
afraid so episode 119 on the chinese
civil war part one might be a while i
hope no one will hold me in too much
contempt over there a Tuesday morning
May 28 everyone I'm going to be doing an
i ama on reddit in the history subreddit
i'll be tweeting details of that as the
date approaches the September trip to
Beijing still on looking forward to
meeting a lot of my favorite expats
there to thank them personally for all
the free info I glom off them and their
blogs this is laszlo Montgomery signing
off from sunny and gorgeous claremont
california take care all and i'll see
you next time for another exciting
episode of the china history podcast